JUDY WOODRUFF: But first:
Researchers have been watching
for months, waiting for a huge
iceberg to break away from
an ice shelf in Antarctica.
That break was confirmed today.
And just to give you a sense
of the size, the volume of the
iceberg is said to be twice
as large as Lake Erie.
Miles O'Brien has been watching
all this and digging into the
larger questions about the
ice shelf.
Here's an update to
an earlier report.
It's part of our weekly segment
on the Leading Edge of science.
MILES O'BRIEN: This fast-growing
rift in the Antarctica ice
just created one of the largest
icebergs ever recorded,
about the size of Delaware,
weighing more than one trillion
tons.
The event had been
anticipated for months.
Finally, some time between
Monday and today, the Larsen
Sea Ice Shelf became 12 percent
smaller.
So, we have known about this
for quite a while, right?
KELLY BRUNT, University
of Maryland: We have
certainly known about
the bulk of this rift
for a while.
MILES O'BRIEN: Kelly Brunt is a
glaciologist at the University
of Maryland and NASA's Goddard
Space Flight Center.
She used a wall of monitors
there to show me the growing
rift, fueled in part by rising
air and sea temperatures.
If the glaciers in West
Antarctica all dropped
into the water, global
sea level would rise
by more than 15 feet.
Brunt showed me the big
picture, a composite of images
from several satellites.
This is how the
glacier ice flows here.
KELLY BRUNT: Ice flows from
the center of the continent
out to the edges, much like
syrup on the center of
your pancake flowing
towards the edges.
And you can see there are
areas where it's moving pretty
slowly, and then there are areas
where it's moving very quickly.
And those quick places
are generally in our
areas of ice shelves.
MILES O'BRIEN: So, when we
think about ice, we think
about something static.
It's not static, is it?
KELLY BRUNT: Not at all.
Actually, it's highly dynamic.
You can see from this
image it looks to me a
lot like a river system.
MILES O'BRIEN: Ice shelves
are connected to the glaciers
that sit on land, but they are
also floating, like ice
cubes in a glass of water.
KELLY BRUNT: If you had a drink
with ice cubes in it, as those
ice cube melts, they don't
add to the height of
the water in the glass.
So when ice shelves break down
and collapse, they do not have
a direct impact on mean sea
level rise.
However, they have
an indirect effect.
These ice shelves buttress
the flow of the ice upstream,
the ice that's flowing into
the system.
And when you lose that
buttressing force,
you allow the upstream
glaciers to flow faster.
So that's similar to putting
more ice cubes into the
glass and letting those melt.
MILES O'BRIEN: Ice falls off the
edge of glaciers all the time.
It is part of a natural
process called calving.
Kelly Brunt says it is important
to judge the size of the
piece that breaks off relative
to the size of the
glacier that is behind it.
She says your fingernails
offer a handy model.
KELLY BRUNT: If you break
your fingernail inside the
white part of your fingernail,
you probably don't
think much of it.
If you break it below the
white part, you put a Band-Aid
on it, you think about it and
you keep an eye on it.
If you lose your whole
fingernail, I don't
know what happens.
It's pretty catastrophic.
This represents losing
the whole fingernail.
MILES O'BRIEN: Like so many
features in Antarctica,
the Larsen Ice Shelf
is named for a famous
19th century explorer.
And it is disappearing,
section by section,
identified by letters.
Larsen A disintegrated in 1995.
And, in 2002, a series
of satellite images
captured the end of Larsen
B in dramatic fashion
over the course of six weeks.
The piece that broke off was
the size of Rhode Island.
KELLY BRUNT: Losing this much
ice, losing ice that represents
roughly the state of Rhode
Island in a month-and-a-half,
just far exceeded
anybody's expectations
of what could happen
in the time scale
that it could happen.
MILES O'BRIEN: So, it was kind
of like, we have to rethink
things here a little bit.
I mean, this is a wakeup call.
KELLY BRUNT: This was
absolutely a wakeup call.
MILES O'BRIEN: Scientists track
the ice using a half-dozen
U.S. and European satellites,
including Landsat, which
gathered these images.
But some of their best data came
from a satellite called ICESat.
Launched in 2003, it
ceased operation in 2009.
It precisely measured the
glaciers using laser beams.
KELLY BRUNT: This is quite
a few years of ICESat data
merged together to get a sense
in meters per year how
our ice sheet is changing.
And you can see, the big picture
here is that our ice sheets
are changing where they are
in contact with both our warming
atmosphere and a warming ocean.
So, it's basically along
the fringe of the continent.
MILES O'BRIEN: When ICESat
failed, NASA started
tracking the ice using
radar and lasers on
board low-flying aircraft.
The IceBridge program is NASA's
largest air campaign ever,
but it still could not match
the eye above the sky.
It goes without saying that you
would view these satellites,
the capability to look at
this, as essential?
KELLY BRUNT: What we're talking
about is a calving of an iceberg
that's a size of a state.
To get that, you really need
a satellite to be able to
see all of it in one shot.
It's a function of scale and
repeatability to go back and
look at that area again with
the satellite that makes these
the perfect tools for looking
at the large-scale change
that we're seeing
in this region.
MILES O'BRIEN: And that's
precisely what Kelly
Brunt and her colleagues
will be doing now,
using satellite data, data
from the scant weather stations
that are on the surface there,
and additionally with buoys
which are in the water itself.
They will be poring over this
data over the course of actually
years to try to make some
sort of definitive statement
-- and I put definitive in
quotes because it's science,
after all -- as to whether
this particular calving event
is linked to climate change
- - Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, is
there a definitive answer
to that at this point?
It sounds like you're saying no.
MILES O'BRIEN: Not just yet.
Here's what we know.
Larsen B, the previous big
calving event, scientists say
there is a very strong pile
of evidence indicating it
is linked to climate change.
Larsen A, they have
practically no data at all.
So, it's one of these things
that, as Kelly Brunt put it,
this is where it gets exciting
for scientists.
They will try to determine
if it's climate change that
actually caused this to happen,
and also they will be
looking at the stability
of the ice shelf behind it.
Does the flow increase?
What about the
glacier behind the
ice shelf itself?
Looking at all that will give
them a lot of clues about what
this is going to mean ultimately
for sea level rise.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And speaking of
that, do they know the effect
this is going to have on sea
levels in the area
and around the world?
MILES O'BRIEN: Yes,
that's the big question.
Larsen C, even though
it's called a shelf,
it's kind of misleading.
It was already in the water.
And so like an ice cube in a
glass of water, it had already
done its bit of displacement
and already had made its
impact on sea level rise.
If it had fallen off, scientists
estimate it would have
increased sea level across the
world by three millimeters.
That the gives you the
idea of the size of this.
So, now the situation here is
to see whether the increased
rate, if there's an increased
rate in the flow of that ice
shelf into the water, what
impact that might have on sea
level rise in coming years.
But, again, Judy, this is
long-term science, and we will
just have to watch it for years
to come.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, finally,
Miles, what happens
to this gigantic piece
of ice now that it's
broken off?
MILES O'BRIEN: Well, it
will probably not stay
intact the size of Delaware.
It will break up over time.
Fortunately, where it is,
it's not going to be in the
way of any shipping channels.
So it shouldn't be a
hazard to navigation,
but that's a big part of
what is going to happen along
with the other research.
They will be tracking to see
how this iceberg breaks up.
But it will be a big
iceberg to start, and over
time it will get smaller.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right,
our iceberg man, Miles
O'Brien, thank you very much.
MILES O'BRIEN:
You're welcome, Judy.